# Challenges of Blockchain in IoT

1. **Scalability**: Scalability issues in the blockchain might lead to centralization, which is casting a shadow over the future of the cryptocurrency. The blockchain scales poorly as the number of nodes in the network increases. This issue is serious as IoT networks are expected to contain a large number of nodes. 
2. **Processing Power and Time**: The processing power and time needed to achieve encryption for all the objects included in a blockchain system. IoT systems have different types of devices which have very different computing capabilities, and not all of them will be able to run the same encryption algorithms at the required speed. 
3. **Storage**: One of the main benefits of blockchain is that it eliminates the need for a central server to store transactions and device IDs, but the ledger has to be stored on the nodes themselves. The distributed ledger will increase in size as time passes and with increasing number of nodes in the network. As said earlier, IoT devices have low computational resources and very low storage capacity. 
4. **Lack of skills**: The blockchain technology is still new. Therefore, a few people have large knowledge and skills about the blockchain, especially in banking. In other applications, there is a widespread lack of understanding of how the blockchain works. The IoT devices exist everywhere, so adopting the blockchain with IoT will be very difficult without public awareness about the blockchain. 
5. **Legal and Compliance**: The blockchain is a new technology that will have the ability to connect different people from different countries without having any legal or compliance code to follow, which is a serious issue for both manufacturers and service providers. This challenge will be the major barrier for adopting blockchain in many businesses and applications. 
6. **Naming and Discovery**: The blockchain technology has not been designed for the IoT, meaning that nodes were not meant to find each other in the network. An example is the Bitcoin application in which the IP addresses of some “senders” are embedded within the Bitcoin client and used by nodes to build the network topology. This approach will not work for the IoT, as IoT devices will keep moving all the time which will change the topology continuously.

# Benefits of Blockchain in IoT

1. **Public**: All participants have the ability to see the all the transactions and all blocks as each participant has its own ledger. The content of the transaction is protected by participant’s private key, so even all participants can see them, they are protected. The IoT is a dynamic system in which all connected devices can share information together and at the same time protecting users’ privacy.
2. **Decentralization**: The majority of participants must verify the transactions in order to approve it and add it to the distributed ledger. There is no single authority that can approve the transactions or set specific rules to have transactions accepted. Therefore, there is a massive amount of trust included since the majority of the participants in the network have to reach an agreement to validate transactions. Therefore, the blockchain will provide a secure platform for IoT devices. In addition, eliminating centralized traffic flows and single point of failure of the current centralized IoT architecture.
3. **Resiliency**: Each node has its own copy of the ledger that contains all transactions that have ever made in the network. So, the blockchain is better able to withstand attack. Even if one node was compromised, the blockchain would be maintained by every other node. Having a copy of data at each node in the IoT will improve information sharing needs. However, it introduces new processing and storage issues. 
4. **Security**: Blockchain has the ability to provide a secure network over untrusted parties which is needed in IoT with numerous and heterogeneous devices. In other words, all IoT network nodes must be malicious to perform an attack. 
5. **Speed**: A blockchain transaction is distributed across the network in minutes and will be processed at any time throughout the day. 
6. **Cost saving**: Existing IoT solutions are expensive because of the high infrastructure and maintenance cost associated with centralized architecture, large server farms, and networking equipment. The total amount of communications that will have to be handled when there are tens of billions of IoT devices will increase those costs substantially. 
7. **Immutability**: Having an immutable ledger is one of the main advantages of blockchain technology. Any changes in the distributed ledger must be verified by the majority of the network nodes. Therefore, the transactions cannot be altered or deleted easily. Having an immutable ledger for IoT data will increase security and privacy which are the major challenges in this technology and all new technologies. 
8. **Anonymity**: To process the transaction, both buyer and seller use anonymous and unique address numbers which keep their identity private. This feature has been criticised as it increases the use of cryptocurrencies in the illegal online market. However, it could be seen as an advantage if used for other purposes, for example, electoral voting systems.