# Environmental issues relevant to India

We can categorise environmental concerns in India as those arising from negative effects of the very process of development; and conditions of poverty and under development. The major problems, which encompass the area of EM, are:

1. **Burgeoning population** and its impact on life support systems, which negate the positive impacts of the developmental programmes.
2. **Rapid growth in the population of domesticated animals** over the past few decades accompanied by a loss of area under grassland and pastures. Around 3.5% of the geographical area is under grasslands, while the domesticated animal population numbers nearly 500 million (1991). 
3. Out of a total area of about 329 million hectares, 175 million hectares of land require special treatment to restore them for productive and profitable use. Land degradation is caused by water and wind erosion (159 million ha), salinity and alkalinity (8 million ha), and river action and other factors (7 million ha). 
4. The **forest wealth is dwindling** due to overgrazing and over-exploitation both for commercial and household needs, encroachments, unsustainable practices including certain practices of shifting cultivation, and developmental activities such as roads, buildings, irrigation and power projects. 
5. The recorded forest cover in the country is about 75 million hectare, which is 19.5% of the total geographical area against the national goal of 33% in the plains and 66% for hilly regions. Even within this area, a meagre 11% constitutes forests with 40% or more of crown cover. The annual rate of loss of the forest cover is 47,500 hectares.
6. The **loss of habitat** is leading to the extinction of plant, animal and microbial species. Over 1500 plant and animal species are in the endangered category.
7. The **wetlands of India**, which are rich in aquatic and bird life providing food and shelter as also the breeding and spawning ground for the marine and fresh water fishes, are facing problems of pollution and over-exploitation.
8. The major **rivers of the country are facing problems of pollution and siltation**. The coastline is under stress and coastal areas have been severely damaged due to indiscriminate construction, waste disposal near the water-line and aquaculture. Coastal vegetation including mangroves and sea grasses is facing extinction. The mountain ecosystems are under threat of serious degradation.
9. India is witnessing a **rising requirement for forest based goods** due which there is extensive deforestation leading to severe loss of natural resources and in turn the erosion of valuable topsoil, is threatening the livelihood and security of millions of hill people and also encroachment into forest protected areas. (As a result of requirement of 70 million m3 of round wood per year in India by the end of the decade and its transportation, there is fear that this could result in loss of high conservation value forests and biodiversity elsewhere)
10. **Increasing demand for water** for different sectors such as agriculture, domestic, energy generation, industry that resulted in depletion of water source. The quality of groundwater is being affected due to chemical pollution and due to the ingress of seawater in coastal areas.
11. **Absence of an integrated land and water use policy** for the country has resulted in a heavy toll of basic natural assets. Coral reef ecosystems are adversely affected by indiscriminate exploitation of corals for production of lime, recreational use and for ornamental trade. Island ecosystems are subjected to pressures of various forms including migration of people from the main land.
12. **Pollution arising from toxic wastes** and non biodegradable consumer articles is on the rise. A large number of industries and other development projects are sited close to heavily populated urban centers, leading to over congestion and over pollution, as also the diversion of population and natural resources from the rural areas. especially in.
13. **Mechanism to indigenously arrive at a reliable estimate of total greenhouse gas emissions** in the country, among various sources such as agriculture, animals, energy production and consumption, forestry and land use change, waste management, etc., is inadequate. More such reliable data, which is indigenously arrived at, is essential for negotiating international law, treaties, protocols and conventions on environment-related problems where developing countries are unduly pressurised.

It is often difficult to clearly delineate the causes and consequences of environmental degradation in terms of simple cause effect relationships. The causes and effects are often interwoven in complex webs of socio-economic, technological and implementation factors.

The liberalisation of economy in India in the recent past is expected to promote consumerism by throwing a wide array of products with wide options to the consumers. This, in turn, is expected to put pressure on the natural resources in the form of raw materials, and therefore, may deplete the natural resources and cause irreversible damages. 

Several plant and animal species may become extinct and the non-renewable resources may be exhausted soon depriving the future generations of their benefits. This has been amply witnessed in the past in several western countries where industrial revolution depleted the natural resources for generations to come. Today, these countries are looking towards the developing countries for raw material and natural resources. India should learn a lesson from the past experiences of industrial development within India and outside of it.